Hi.
My name's Brian Caffo, and welcome to
the lecture on A/B testing as part of our
Executive Day science specialization.
I'm going to start this lecture by
posing one of the most fundamental
questions of our time, and
that is how can Jeff sell more books.
So Jeff is another one of
the instructors in our specialization,
and he does have a book called
the The Elements of Data Analytic Style.
It's a great book.
Get it off of Leanpub.
So imagine if Jeff had two Twitter's
ad campaigns he'd like to compare
to see which one was more effective.
The first one says, a practical but
non-technical guide to data analysis.
Pay what you want.
And the other one says,
a book of non-technical tips for
analyzing data the right way.
[INAUDIBLE] So, he wants to
compare these two ad campaigns,
what are some possible strategies
he might use to do that?
Well, one is he could run the ad serially.
He could run for a couple of weeks
the first ad then run the second one for
a couple of weeks.
Maybe after a washout period, and
then compare the conversion rate during
the time periods of the two ads.
Now, that has the problem
that anything that he found,
whether it's an effective ad type or
absence of effect, could also be
attributed to whatever's aliased with
the time periods that he was studying.
For example, imagine the first ad ran
during Christmas or a major holiday.
Then, of course people's purchasing
patterns are different during that time of
year, than during a time where
there isn't a major holiday.
So, he wouldn't be able to conclude
that there is a difference or absence of
a difference because of ad campaign
because of this lurking variable and
that's what we're going to study today.
I think this idea of lurking variables and
confounding underlies a lot of the issues
with observational studies and
why in particular in nutritional studies
we see kind of opposite results so often.
Chocolate is good for us one week and
it's bad for us another week.
And I saw this great article
where it's a blogger,
of E Magazine, written by healthcare
journalists for healthcare journalists.
And the title was, Don't fudge
the facts on chocolate studies and
it actually goes through many of
the topics we're gonna talk about today.
So such as confounding, but chocolate is
one of these examples where frequently
it's associated with cancer,
it's not associated with cancer, etc.
So I'd like to use chocolate today to
discuss the issue of confounding and
how randomization as is used in A/B
testing and randomized controlled trials,
how that can help combat
some of these issues.
And I made up a little data set and
it's a little bit contrived.
But, kind of purposefully so, so
that you can just focus on the concepts.
In this case, we have two group,
to the left the group of people who
eats chocolate and to the right the group
of people who don't eat chocolate.
We're interested in
ascertaining whether or
not chocolate lowers our blood pressure,
for whatever the reason.
So everyone who has a smiley
face has low blood pressure,
and everyone who has a frowny
face has high blood pressure.
And if you were to look at this data set
where we just observed people's chocolate
eating patterns and compared the two
groups, you'd see five out of either for
the chocolate group and three out of
either for the non-chocolate group
had low blood pressure or
had normal blood pressure.
And so you might conclude that if there
was enough subjects of this sort, maybe
let each smiley face represents 1,000
people or something like that, then you
would conclude that there's a significant
difference associated with chocolate.
However, imagine if there
was a lurking variable.
In this case, imagine that
the lurking variable is whether or
not the subject is taking
anti-hypertensive medication.
Something that's clearly
related to blood pressure.
In this case the group of people who are
naturally eating chocolate happen to have
a much higher percentage of people who are
taking this anti-hypertensive medications.
And if you count 5 out of 7 for the red
faces, the people on the medication,
3 out of 9 for the blue faces
being happy,there's a greater
percentage of people with
lower blood pressure,
on the anti hypertensive medications,
likely due to their medications.
So in this case, you can't really
ascertain whether this effect is due to
the chocolate or due to the
anti-hypertensive medications, we haven't,
you know, for this made up example,
I think we'd all probably conclude it's.
Likely do to the anti-hypertensive
medications.
So, how can we combat that?
Ideally, we'd like to compare two groups
with an equal mixture of people
who are on medication versus not.
Or we could fix medication and
compare just among
those taking medication,
their chocolate-eating habits and
just among those not taking medication,
their chocolate eating habits.
Of course that later
strategy requires us to know
what variables we need to control for
and to have measured them.
Randomization, on the other hand,
is an attempt to balance the observed and
unobserved variables that
may contaminate our result.
In randomization,
we simply randomize every subject.
In this case, you've randomized them and
say go eat a bunch of chocolate, and
randomize the other group and
say you're not allowed to eat chocolate.
The fundamental problem, of course, with
randomization in many cases like this one,
you can't ethically carry out a random,
ethically or
practically carry out a randomized trial.
So the goal of randomization again
is to compare like with like.
Get apples to apples and
oranges to oranges,
in other words the group's that
you're comparing have an equal, have
roughly equal proportional mixtures of all
the lurking variables that are associated,
that are typically associated with
the predictor and with the outcome.
And you've broken that
association with the,
with the treatment by virtue
of the randomization.
And I'll give you this wonderful quote
that I think summarizes this idea
very neatly.
It's by R.A. Fisher, one of the early
pioneers on the subject of randomization.
And he said randomization
properly carried out,
relieves the experimenter from
the anxiety of considering and estimating
the magnitude of the innumerable causes
by which his data may be disturbed.
This by, this quote,
by the way, I found in a wonderful paper
by Armitage on Fisher, Bradford Hill, and
randomization, a discussion of some of
the early thinking on randomization.
Let's return to our example, and
see what would likely have
occurred if we had randomization.
Well it would make, at least with
high probability, the treated and
untreated groups having
roughly equal proportions
of people on anti-hypertensive
medications and people not.
And in this case,
we got the opposite result.
3 out of 8 for chocolate and
5 out of 8 for no chocolate.
So, as an example.
Now the effect actually reverses itself
when we perform the randomization.
I'd like to close this lecture by asking
the question is randomization a cure all?
Is it all we need to think about for
trying to solve some of the problems
with observational studies?
And the answer of course by
posing this question is no.
And one particular way in which bias
can creep back into randomized studies
is through missing data and I concocted
an example where in this case for
the chocolate group its just like before 3
out of 8 its the same set of smiley faces
and frowning faces as before, but for the
non-chocolate group almost every person
who was not taking anti-hypertensive
medications dropped out of the study.
They said for whatever the reason
there most of them were frowny faces.
So they were saying I've
got high blood pressure.
I feel like eating some chocolate.
Whatever, they dropped out of the study.
And so
now the comparison is contaminated again
by the fact that the groups
aren't directly comparable.
The mixture of anti-hypertensive
medication folks
is different in the two groups.
So just as a fun, and
again the specifics of all the different
ways in which A/B tests or
a randomized trial can fail is perhaps out
of the out of the purview of this class.
But I just want to emphasize the fact
that just because you've randomized
the necessary things to think
about don't just end there.
So at any rate I'd like to
summarize this lecture.
And the fundamental point of this lecture
is the main characteristic of A/B testing,
which is the main characteristic of
randomized trials in the medical
literature, is the idea of using
randomization to balance these confounding
factors in lurking variables that would
otherwise contaminate the results.
And the benefit is that they hopefully,
at least with high probability,
will balance both the known confounding
factors and the unknown ones as well.
So I hope you enjoyed today's lecture and
I look forward to seeing
you in the next class.